README.md, before:

# ez-kubeadm -- Spin up local multi-node Kubernetes clusters with a single command.

My interest in automating Kubernetes cluster creation for a local VirtualBox environment has produced this set of Bash scripts, Vagrantfiles, and YAML to easily create multi-node kubernetes clusters on Windows WSL or Linux. Kubeadm is the tool used to deploy the cluster.

The Kubernetes VMs can be either Ubuntu (default, though CentOS is easily selected via runtime parameter).  Currently supporting any of five networking alternatives, a CNI network is selected via environment variable -- one of {calico, canal, flannel, romana, weave}.  Calico is deployed by default.

After cloning the repository locally (into, say $HOME/projects/ez-kubeadm), installing the few required applications, setting up directories and env variables, a complete Kubernetes cluster based on Ubuntu, with Calico networking, can be built with a single command in the vagrant project directory.

Assuming you've downloaded the ez-kubeadm files in $HOME/projects/ez-kubeadm, these are the commands to build a working
Ubuntu-based cluster in $HOME/projects/ukube in about 10 minutes:
```
$ cd $HOME/projects
$ mkdir ukube && cd ukube
$ vagrant init
$ cp ../ez-kubeadm/* .
$ cp $HOME/.ssh/id_rsa.pub id_rsa.pub.$LOGNAME
```
You're ready to create a cluster. Re-create your Kubernetes cluster, anytime from this directory, with a single command:
```
$ source ./makeK8s.sh
```
10-15 minutes later, the cluster is up and ready to use:
```
$ kubectl config use-context ukube
Switched to context "ukube".
$ kubectl get nodes
NAME     STATUS   ROLES    AGE     VERSION
master   Ready    master   5m41s   v1.13.4
node1    Ready    <none>   3m8s    v1.13.4
node2    Ready    <none>   21s     v1.13.4                                                                             
```
Now, with the nodes manually added to /etc/hosts (or C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts), and my public key
    installed on all nodes, I can easily ssh to nodes by name, and from any directory on my host:
```
$ cd $HOME/test
```
Let's spin up a BusyBox container on each node, as a simple test:
```
$ kubectl create -f ds-bb.yaml
daemonset.apps/bb created
$ kubectl get po 
NAME       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
bb-f77cg   1/1     Running   0          2m2s
bb-r4blj   1/1     Running   0          87s
bb-tzhtl   1/1     Running   0          2m2s

$ ssh master
Warning: Permanently added the ECDSA host key for IP address '192.168.205.10' to the list of known hosts.
Welcome to Ubuntu 16.04.6 LTS (GNU/Linux 4.4.0-142-generic x86_64)
--- misc text removed ---
username@master: $
```
Destroy the cluster by cd'ing into the project folder for the cluster, then run:
```
$ vagrant destroy -f
```

To create a cluster built from CentOS and Flannel networking:
```
$ export k8snet=flannel
$ source ./makeK8s.sh -s centos
```

I've had several issues with VirtualBox 6.0 -- I strongly recommend using 5.2.26 at this time.
I've worked out all the issues, and am satisfied that that environment is as good as the
native Ubuntu under which these scripts were initially developed (more below).

As of mid-March, 2019, this script creates a 3-node k8s cluster, with these versions:
  * Kubernetes: 1.13.4                          (current version on kubernetes.io)
  * Docker:     18.06.2                         (prescribed by kubernetes.io)
  * Centos:     CentOS7,                        (prescribed by kubernetes.io))
    * Version:  1902.01                         (latest CentOS7 box from Vagrant)
  or
  * Ubuntu:     Ubuntu/xenial64                 (prescribed by kubernetes.io)
    * Version   20190308.0.0                    (latest Ubuntu Xenial box from Vagrant)

## Setup Instructions(Linux and Windows WSL hosts):
  1. Install VirtualBox and vagrant on your host system (I happen to use native Ubuntu on one system, and
     Windows WSL (Ubuntu) on the other.
  2. Create a project directory; cd to the project directory
  3. Run vagrant init
  4. Cluster network is calico, by default. To change, export an env var, $k8snet, setting it to
     one of: calico, canal, flannel, romana, weave
  5. We assume kube config files are gathered together in a directory, ~/.kube/config.d, on the host. You'll get an
     error if the directory does not exist, or another is not specified as an argument to makeK8s.sh.
  6. Pull the collection of files from github into the project directory:
       * makeK8s.sh (one script to rule them all, and in the darkness bind them (LOTR))
       * Vagrantfiles (Vagrantfile.centos and Vagrantfile.ubuntu -- one of which is copied to Vagrantfile at runtime.
       * post-k8s.sh (make account for host user on nodes, prepare to pull kube config file, admin.conf)
       * pull-k8s-admin.sh (download admin.conf from master, for use on host)
       * modKubeConfigFile.sh (process admin.conf file, for 
       * setKubeConfigVar.sh (consolidate multi-cluster configs into KUBECONFIG env var)
       * copy public key for a desired host user account. E.g., I am on my host, and want to ssh
         to any node as <username>. I copy my id_rsa.pub file into the vagrant project directory, for scripted
         install on nodes

       Network files (tweaked for vagrant/VBox, Ubuntu and CentOS).
       Calico and Weave need no YAML mods. Weave, however, requires a route to be set for worker nodes to find the master.
       Canal, Flannel, and Romana require minor mods their YAML; e.g. use 2nd network adapter (enp0s8/eth1).
       The modified YAML files are included in this repository. They are:
       * canal2.yaml, canal2c.yaml (canal2 for Ubuntu, canal2c for CentOS),
       * kube-flannel.yaml, kube-flannelc.yaml, and
       * romana-kubeadm.yaml

       Romana curiously seems to present a catch-22: romana-agent won't install on "not-ready" nodes,
       but the nodes can only become ready when romana-agent is up and running. My solution: add tolerance for
       nodes that are not-ready (applied to the romana-agent daemonset YAML).
  7. Check the CPU/memory settings in the relevant Vagrantfile -- either Vagrantfile.ubuntu, or Vagrantfile.centos
  8. Run "source ./makeK8s.sh -s ubuntu", or "source ./makeK8s.sh -s centos" to create a new cluster
  8. Edits to the Vagrantfile (Vagrantfile.ubuntu or Vagrantfile.centos) should only be needed to:
      * change the memory or CPU settings for the nodes
      * change master and worker node IP addresses.
        Ubuntu master IP is 192.168.205.10; worker node IPs immediately follow, i.e. node1 is 192.168.205.11
        CentOS cmaster IP is 192.168.205.15; worker node IPs immediately follow, i.e. cnode1 is 192.168.205.16
      * want more/fewer nodes? edit the relevant servers array, below.
  9. Install kubectl on your host system, per instructions on kubernetes.io
     One method (https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/):
       ```
       curl -LO https://storage.googleapis.com/kubernetes-release/release/$(curl -s https://storage.googleapis.com/kubernetes-release/release/stable.txt)/bin/linux/amd64/kubectl
       ```
     Make it executable (chmod +x) and move to a preferred directory in your path, e.g. /usr/local/bin.
  10. To set the KUBECONFIG env var at any time, on any shell, cd to the project directory, and "source" the
      script "setKubeConfigVar.sh":
      ```
      $ source ./setKubeConfigVar.sh
      ```
      Consider copying this script into your path, somewhere.
  11. Only one context can be active at a time, across multiple shells.
  12 Several clusters can exist at any point in time.  View available configs using:
      ```
      $ kubectl config get-contexts
      CURRENT   NAME       CLUSTER     AUTHINFO      NAMESPACE
                ckube      ckube-clu   ckube-admin
                minikube   minikube    minikube
      *         ukube      ukube-clu   ukube-admin
      ```
  13. Select context (project name) using
      ```
      $ kubectl config use-context <context-name>
      ```
  14. I suggest adding the node names (master, node1, etc) to your hosts file.  In Windows, these changes are applied to the 
      native Windows hosts file -- not /etc/hosts in bash.  The native Windows hosts file can be found at
      C:\Windows\system32\drivers\etc\hosts.
  
## WSL Notes (running these scripts on Windows 10's Linux environment):
My development and testing were initially performed on Ubuntu 18 (Bionic). I later ported it to 
Windows 10's WSL Ubuntu (bash) environment.

There were serveral changes required to get things working on WSL, some in the Vagrantfiles, some in the
Windows environment.  The required file changes are all included in the files in this repo.

I've tried to capture all necessary steps here. I suggest reviewing: https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/other/wsl.html.
Replace <user> with your preferred host user account. Replace <projects> with a directory of your choosing.

  1. Install Windows version of VirtualBox -- 5.2.x.  VBox 6.0 gave me headaches that I could not resolve.
  2. Add VirtualBox binaries to system PATH
       System->Properties->Adv System Settings->Environment Variables...->System variables
     The VirtualBox path is typically c:\Program Files\Oracle\VirtualBox
  3. Install vagrant for Linux in WSL bash.  I used 
       wget https://releases.hashicorp.com/vagrant/2.2.3/vagrant_2.2.3_x86_64.deb
     Then
       sudo apt-get install ./vagrant_2.2.3_x86_64.deb
     NOTE: apt update from Windows bash seems to give older version; I opted for the latest, from hashicorp.
  4. Update your WSL environment -- vagrant projects don't work well from /home/<user>. I suggest basing
     your projects in, for example, /mnt/c/Users/<user>/projects, but use a symlink in a directory under your
     home directly, as suggested here:
       https://cepa.io/2018/02/20/linuxizing-your-windows-pc-part2/
     Let's make that more concrete:
       My username is dsloyer; $HOME is /home/dsloyer; my projects directory in Windows is
       C:\Users\dsloyer\projects, where my vagrant project folders live. Assume that we want to access 
       that directory from $HOME/projects. Use a symlink to accomplish this.
       Make the vagrant project folders accessible from my $HOME directory:
       ```
       cd $HOME
       ln -s /mnt/c/Users/dsloyer/projects projects
       ```
  4.1. export VAGRANT_WSL_WINDOWS_ACCESS_USER_HOME_PATH, and append to .bashrc
       Set the root path to your vagrant projects directory by exporting this env var (and append to .bashrc):
       ```
       export VAGRANT_WSL_WINDOWS_ACCESS_USER_HOME_PATH=/home/dsloyer/projects
       ```
  4.2 export VAGRANT_WSL_ENABLE_WINDOWS_ACCESS, and append to .bashrc
     ```
     export VAGRANT_WSL_ENABLE_WINDOWS_ACCESS=1
     echo "export VAGRANT_WSL_ENABLE_WINDOWS_ACCESS=1" >>$HOME/.bashrc
     ```
  4.3 To avoid rsync and vagrant ssh problems (e.g. "error when attempting to rsync a synced folder":
     ```
     export VAGRANT_HOME="/home/dsloyer/.vagrant.d"
     ```
     Note: In Vagrantfile, I've added this line to avoid another rsync issue: config.ssh.insert_key = false
  8. There is a problem with some Ubuntu box versions on VM spinup:
        "rawfile#0 failed to create the raw output file VERR_PATH_NOT_FOUND".
     The error can be avoided by adding this line to the Vagrantfile:
       ```
       vb.customize [ 'modifyvm', :id, '--uartmode1', 'disconnected']
       ```
  9. C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts file permissions -- user must have modify permission
     to avoid "Permission denied" for the vagrant hostsupdater plugin to work (it's not installed by
     VBox 5.2.x, but is in VBox 6.0.)
  10. I've observed no need to run as administrator -- neither bash, or VBox Manager
  11. When this group of files is pulled down from github, they may arrive as DOS-formatted files, which
     causes runtime errors.  Install and use dos2unix utility to modify the shell scripts, to correct.
  12. Mounted Windows partitions, e.g. C:, may ignore permissions set, for example, by chmod. Correct this
      by re-mounting the volume, specifying "-o metadata", viz.:
      ```
       $ sudo umount /mnt/c && sudo mount -t drvfs C: /mnt/c -o metadata
      ```
      Also, the files in /mnt/c may all be owned by root. Adjust as needed.
      For more, see https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/commandline/2018/01/12/chmod-chown-wsl-improvements/
      Also: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/wsl-config
  13. With permissions changes enabled from bash (via metadata), tighten any ssh key permissions to avoid
      problems: I set my keys as "chmod 644 id_rsa*"
  14. I've had problems with VMs (Xenial) booting extremely slowly with VBox 6.0, while v5.2.26 works great.
      see https://github.com/hashicorp/vagrant/issues/10578, for a discussion of this issue.
  15. Another VBox 6.0 issue: Centos cluster VMs don't come up under VBox 6.0 either -- the master node
      boots fine, but the next VM fails to spin up. I've not yet found similar reports from others.
  16. Side note on VBox 6.0: UAC will trigger when the hostupdater (a vagrant plugin) tries to update
      the hosts file. Not sure how necessary this plugin is -- installed on v6.0 by default, consider
      removing it via "vagrant plugin remove".

## Network Notes:
These all seem to work well -- feel free to use any of them.  Any quirks have been addressed in the Vagrantfiles and YAML:
  * calico:    Simply works.
  * weave:     Worker nodes require a static route to the master node.
  * romana:    Seems to require romana-agent daemonset tolerance for not-ready nodes
  * flannel:   Its yaml must be tweaked to use enp0s8(Ubuntu) or eth1(CentOS) host-only interface, not the NAT'd one
  * canal      Its yaml must be tweaked to use enp0s8(Ubuntu) or eth1(CentOS) host-only interface, not the NAT'd one

## SSH key handling

In building the worker nodes, We run a script on each of the nodes to scp the kubernetes join script
from the master node (where kubeadm places it, while building the master node).
This allows automation of the nodes joining the kubernetes cluster.

To use scp, we use the aforementioned key pair for the vagrant user on each of the nodes,
in /home/vagrant/.ssh
On the master, we also need to add the vagrant pub-key into the master's authorized_keys file, in
/home/vagrant/.ssh/authorized_keys

Thankfully, the project directory is automatically mounted onto each node by Vagrant, at /vagrant.
Therefore, the SSH keys of interest are accessible by all our Vagrant VMs, at that location.
I should add, however, that the contents of that directory are not well-synced, so changes to contents
of files in /vagrant often go unseen, and may be lost. It's not a file server!

Commit message:

add test to show we can immediately use the cluster

README.md, after:

# ez-kubeadm -- Spin up local multi-node Kubernetes clusters with a single command.

My interest in automating Kubernetes cluster creation for a local VirtualBox environment has produced this set of Bash scripts, Vagrantfiles, and YAML to easily create multi-node kubernetes clusters on Windows WSL or Linux. Kubeadm is the tool used to deploy the cluster.

The Kubernetes VMs can be either Ubuntu (default, though CentOS is easily selected via runtime parameter).  Currently supporting any of five networking alternatives, a CNI network is selected via environment variable -- one of {calico, canal, flannel, romana, weave}.  Calico is deployed by default.

After cloning the repository locally (into, say $HOME/projects/ez-kubeadm), installing the few required applications, setting up directories and env variables, a complete Kubernetes cluster based on Ubuntu, with Calico networking, can be built with a single command in the vagrant project directory.

Assuming you've downloaded the ez-kubeadm files in $HOME/projects/ez-kubeadm, these are the commands to build a working
Ubuntu-based cluster in $HOME/projects/ukube in about 10 minutes:
```
$ cd $HOME/projects
$ mkdir ukube && cd ukube
$ vagrant init
$ cp ../ez-kubeadm/* .
$ cp $HOME/.ssh/id_rsa.pub id_rsa.pub.$LOGNAME
```
You're ready to create a cluster. Re-create your Kubernetes cluster, anytime from this directory, with a single command:
```
$ source ./makeK8s.sh
```
10-15 minutes later, the cluster is up and ready to use:
```
$ kubectl config use-context ukube
Switched to context "ukube".
$ kubectl get nodes
NAME     STATUS   ROLES    AGE     VERSION
master   Ready    master   5m41s   v1.13.4
node1    Ready    <none>   3m8s    v1.13.4
node2    Ready    <none>   21s     v1.13.4                                                                             

```
Let's change directory, spin up a BusyBox container on each node, then ssh to the master node:
```
$ cd $HOME/test
$ kubectl create -f ds-bb.yaml
daemonset.apps/bb created

$ ssh master
The authenticity of host 'master (192.168.205.10)' can't be established.
ECDSA key fingerprint is SHA256:lHvDa0Gg2wnjGeD7rmXWw5ltSGzc8OCnewi9xJpDfXE.
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no)? yes
Warning: Permanently added 'master' (ECDSA) to the list of known hosts.
Welcome to Ubuntu 16.04.6 LTS (GNU/Linux 4.4.0-142-generic x86_64)
--- some text removed ---
username@master:~$ kubectl get po
NAME       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
bb-f77cg   1/1     Running   0          17m
bb-r4blj   1/1     Running   0          17m
bb-tzhtl   1/1     Running   0          17m
```
Destroy the cluster by cd'ing into the project folder for the cluster, then run:
```
$ vagrant destroy -f
```

To create a cluster built from CentOS and Flannel networking:
```
$ export k8snet=flannel
$ source ./makeK8s.sh -s centos
```

I've had several issues with VirtualBox 6.0 -- I strongly recommend using 5.2.26 at this time.
I've worked out all the issues, and am satisfied that that environment is as good as the
native Ubuntu under which these scripts were initially developed (more below).

As of mid-March, 2019, this script creates a 3-node k8s cluster, with these versions:
  * Kubernetes: 1.13.4                          (current version on kubernetes.io)
  * Docker:     18.06.2                         (prescribed by kubernetes.io)
  * Centos:     CentOS7,                        (prescribed by kubernetes.io))
    * Version:  1902.01                         (latest CentOS7 box from Vagrant)
  or
  * Ubuntu:     Ubuntu/xenial64                 (prescribed by kubernetes.io)
    * Version   20190308.0.0                    (latest Ubuntu Xenial box from Vagrant)

## Setup Instructions(Linux and Windows WSL hosts):
  1. Install VirtualBox and vagrant on your host system (I happen to use native Ubuntu on one system, and
     Windows WSL (Ubuntu) on the other.
  2. Create a project directory; cd to the project directory
  3. Run vagrant init
  4. Cluster network is calico, by default. To change, export an env var, $k8snet, setting it to
     one of: calico, canal, flannel, romana, weave
  5. We assume kube config files are gathered together in a directory, ~/.kube/config.d, on the host. You'll get an
     error if the directory does not exist, or another is not specified as an argument to makeK8s.sh.
  6. Pull the collection of files from github into the project directory:
       * makeK8s.sh (one script to rule them all, and in the darkness bind them (LOTR))
       * Vagrantfiles (Vagrantfile.centos and Vagrantfile.ubuntu -- one of which is copied to Vagrantfile at runtime.
       * post-k8s.sh (make account for host user on nodes, prepare to pull kube config file, admin.conf)
       * pull-k8s-admin.sh (download admin.conf from master, for use on host)
       * modKubeConfigFile.sh (process admin.conf file, for 
       * setKubeConfigVar.sh (consolidate multi-cluster configs into KUBECONFIG env var)
       * copy public key for a desired host user account. E.g., I am on my host, and want to ssh
         to any node as <username>. I copy my id_rsa.pub file into the vagrant project directory, for scripted
         install on nodes

       Network files (tweaked for vagrant/VBox, Ubuntu and CentOS).
       Calico and Weave need no YAML mods. Weave, however, requires a route to be set for worker nodes to find the master.
       Canal, Flannel, and Romana require minor mods their YAML; e.g. use 2nd network adapter (enp0s8/eth1).
       The modified YAML files are included in this repository. They are:
       * canal2.yaml, canal2c.yaml (canal2 for Ubuntu, canal2c for CentOS),
       * kube-flannel.yaml, kube-flannelc.yaml, and
       * romana-kubeadm.yaml

       Romana curiously seems to present a catch-22: romana-agent won't install on "not-ready" nodes,
       but the nodes can only become ready when romana-agent is up and running. My solution: add tolerance for
       nodes that are not-ready (applied to the romana-agent daemonset YAML).
  7. Check the CPU/memory settings in the relevant Vagrantfile -- either Vagrantfile.ubuntu, or Vagrantfile.centos
  8. Run "source ./makeK8s.sh -s ubuntu", or "source ./makeK8s.sh -s centos" to create a new cluster
  8. Edits to the Vagrantfile (Vagrantfile.ubuntu or Vagrantfile.centos) should only be needed to:
      * change the memory or CPU settings for the nodes
      * change master and worker node IP addresses.
        Ubuntu master IP is 192.168.205.10; worker node IPs immediately follow, i.e. node1 is 192.168.205.11
        CentOS cmaster IP is 192.168.205.15; worker node IPs immediately follow, i.e. cnode1 is 192.168.205.16
      * want more/fewer nodes? edit the relevant servers array, below.
  9. Install kubectl on your host system, per instructions on kubernetes.io
     One method (https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/):
       ```
       curl -LO https://storage.googleapis.com/kubernetes-release/release/$(curl -s https://storage.googleapis.com/kubernetes-release/release/stable.txt)/bin/linux/amd64/kubectl
       ```
     Make it executable (chmod +x) and move to a preferred directory in your path, e.g. /usr/local/bin.
  10. To set the KUBECONFIG env var at any time, on any shell, cd to the project directory, and "source" the
      script "setKubeConfigVar.sh":
      ```
      $ source ./setKubeConfigVar.sh
      ```
      Consider copying this script into your path, somewhere.
  11. Only one context can be active at a time, across multiple shells.
  12 Several clusters can exist at any point in time.  View available configs using:
      ```
      $ kubectl config get-contexts
      CURRENT   NAME       CLUSTER     AUTHINFO      NAMESPACE
                ckube      ckube-clu   ckube-admin
                minikube   minikube    minikube
      *         ukube      ukube-clu   ukube-admin
      ```
  13. Select context (project name) using
      ```
      $ kubectl config use-context <context-name>
      ```
  14. I suggest adding the node names (master, node1, etc) to your hosts file.  In Windows, these changes are applied to the 
      native Windows hosts file -- not /etc/hosts in bash.  The native Windows hosts file can be found at
      C:\Windows\system32\drivers\etc\hosts.
  
## WSL Notes (running these scripts on Windows 10's Linux environment):
My development and testing were initially performed on Ubuntu 18 (Bionic). I later ported it to 
Windows 10's WSL Ubuntu (bash) environment.

There were serveral changes required to get things working on WSL, some in the Vagrantfiles, some in the
Windows environment.  The required file changes are all included in the files in this repo.

I've tried to capture all necessary steps here. I suggest reviewing: https://www.vagrantup.com/docs/other/wsl.html.
Replace <user> with your preferred host user account. Replace <projects> with a directory of your choosing.

  1. Install Windows version of VirtualBox -- 5.2.x.  VBox 6.0 gave me headaches that I could not resolve.
  2. Add VirtualBox binaries to system PATH
       System->Properties->Adv System Settings->Environment Variables...->System variables
     The VirtualBox path is typically c:\Program Files\Oracle\VirtualBox
  3. Install vagrant for Linux in WSL bash.  I used 
       wget https://releases.hashicorp.com/vagrant/2.2.3/vagrant_2.2.3_x86_64.deb
     Then
       sudo apt-get install ./vagrant_2.2.3_x86_64.deb
     NOTE: apt update from Windows bash seems to give older version; I opted for the latest, from hashicorp.
  4. Update your WSL environment -- vagrant projects don't work well from /home/<user>. I suggest basing
     your projects in, for example, /mnt/c/Users/<user>/projects, but use a symlink in a directory under your
     home directly, as suggested here:
       https://cepa.io/2018/02/20/linuxizing-your-windows-pc-part2/
     Let's make that more concrete:
       My username is dsloyer; $HOME is /home/dsloyer; my projects directory in Windows is
       C:\Users\dsloyer\projects, where my vagrant project folders live. Assume that we want to access 
       that directory from $HOME/projects. Use a symlink to accomplish this.
       Make the vagrant project folders accessible from my $HOME directory:
       ```
       cd $HOME
       ln -s /mnt/c/Users/dsloyer/projects projects
       ```
  4.1. export VAGRANT_WSL_WINDOWS_ACCESS_USER_HOME_PATH, and append to .bashrc
       Set the root path to your vagrant projects directory by exporting this env var (and append to .bashrc):
       ```
       export VAGRANT_WSL_WINDOWS_ACCESS_USER_HOME_PATH=/home/dsloyer/projects
       ```
  4.2 export VAGRANT_WSL_ENABLE_WINDOWS_ACCESS, and append to .bashrc
     ```
     export VAGRANT_WSL_ENABLE_WINDOWS_ACCESS=1
     echo "export VAGRANT_WSL_ENABLE_WINDOWS_ACCESS=1" >>$HOME/.bashrc
     ```
  4.3 To avoid rsync and vagrant ssh problems (e.g. "error when attempting to rsync a synced folder":
     ```
     export VAGRANT_HOME="/home/dsloyer/.vagrant.d"
     ```
     Note: In Vagrantfile, I've added this line to avoid another rsync issue: config.ssh.insert_key = false
  8. There is a problem with some Ubuntu box versions on VM spinup:
        "rawfile#0 failed to create the raw output file VERR_PATH_NOT_FOUND".
     The error can be avoided by adding this line to the Vagrantfile:
       ```
       vb.customize [ 'modifyvm', :id, '--uartmode1', 'disconnected']
       ```
  9. C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts file permissions -- user must have modify permission
     to avoid "Permission denied" for the vagrant hostsupdater plugin to work (it's not installed by
     VBox 5.2.x, but is in VBox 6.0.)
  10. I've observed no need to run as administrator -- neither bash, or VBox Manager
  11. When this group of files is pulled down from github, they may arrive as DOS-formatted files, which
     causes runtime errors.  Install and use dos2unix utility to modify the shell scripts, to correct.
  12. Mounted Windows partitions, e.g. C:, may ignore permissions set, for example, by chmod. Correct this
      by re-mounting the volume, specifying "-o metadata", viz.:
      ```
       $ sudo umount /mnt/c && sudo mount -t drvfs C: /mnt/c -o metadata
      ```
      Also, the files in /mnt/c may all be owned by root. Adjust as needed.
      For more, see https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/commandline/2018/01/12/chmod-chown-wsl-improvements/
      Also: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/wsl-config
  13. With permissions changes enabled from bash (via metadata), tighten any ssh key permissions to avoid
      problems: I set my keys as "chmod 644 id_rsa*"
  14. I've had problems with VMs (Xenial) booting extremely slowly with VBox 6.0, while v5.2.26 works great.
      see https://github.com/hashicorp/vagrant/issues/10578, for a discussion of this issue.
  15. Another VBox 6.0 issue: Centos cluster VMs don't come up under VBox 6.0 either -- the master node
      boots fine, but the next VM fails to spin up. I've not yet found similar reports from others.
  16. Side note on VBox 6.0: UAC will trigger when the hostupdater (a vagrant plugin) tries to update
      the hosts file. Not sure how necessary this plugin is -- installed on v6.0 by default, consider
      removing it via "vagrant plugin remove".

## Network Notes:
These all seem to work well -- feel free to use any of them.  Any quirks have been addressed in the Vagrantfiles and YAML:
  * calico:    Simply works.
  * weave:     Worker nodes require a static route to the master node.
  * romana:    Seems to require romana-agent daemonset tolerance for not-ready nodes
  * flannel:   Its yaml must be tweaked to use enp0s8(Ubuntu) or eth1(CentOS) host-only interface, not the NAT'd one
  * canal      Its yaml must be tweaked to use enp0s8(Ubuntu) or eth1(CentOS) host-only interface, not the NAT'd one

## SSH key handling

In building the worker nodes, We run a script on each of the nodes to scp the kubernetes join script
from the master node (where kubeadm places it, while building the master node).
This allows automation of the nodes joining the kubernetes cluster.

To use scp, we use the aforementioned key pair for the vagrant user on each of the nodes,
in /home/vagrant/.ssh
On the master, we also need to add the vagrant pub-key into the master's authorized_keys file, in
/home/vagrant/.ssh/authorized_keys

Thankfully, the project directory is automatically mounted onto each node by Vagrant, at /vagrant.
Therefore, the SSH keys of interest are accessible by all our Vagrant VMs, at that location.
I should add, however, that the contents of that directory are not well-synced, so changes to contents
of files in /vagrant often go unseen, and may be lost. It's not a file server!
